Taiga Specification (#149)
anoma/specs: src/architecture/logics/taiga.md

# Taiga

# Introduction
Taiga is a component of Anoma that is used to produce valid state transition proposals. Taiga defines what a valid transaction is and provides the means to produce and verify transactions.

A valid **transaction** is defined as a *balanced* set of valid **partial transactions**. A partial transaction is valid when:
- applications the state of which is being affected by the proposed state transition authorize the state transition
- the proposed state transition doesn't violate the Taiga rules

> Actors use Taiga to produce and verify the proofs required to form partial transactions and balanced transactions. The executor function uses Taiga to verify the transactions before applying them to the state.

Reviewer: Are `Actors` a defined within Taiga, or does it refer to an Anoma wide concept?

Author: I wasn't sure if `agents` carries some additional meaning, so i used `actors` as a placeholder for any role that uses Taiga, not a term. Should I change it to `agents`?

Reviewer: Yes, it seems to be compatible with our [definition](https://specs.anoma.net/main/glossary.html#agent)

Reviewer: Hmm, I think it should be `Actors or Agents` since these could be non-deterministic (e.g. users) or deterministic (e.g. execution engine).

To support shielded state transitions, the produced proofs are zero-knowledge, currently using the Halo2 proving system. Taiga uses proof recursion to provide function privacy for custom predicates. Taiga is designed in a UTXO model, the notes are distributed and stored in an encrypted form.

Taiga was heavily inspired by [Zcash Orchard](https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/main/protocol/protocol.pdf) and [ZEXE](https://eprint.iacr.org/2018/962).

> **Note:** ⚠️ Instantiations and some of the exact formulas are unstable ⚠️

> **Note:** ⚠️ Some of the names in this section are outdated

> **Note:** If you want to learn more about Taiga as a standalone component, check [the Taiga repository](https://github.com/anoma/taiga)

## Functions provided by Taiga

> - **create a partial transaction:** users create initial partial transactions to give away what they have and set the constraints on what they want. These partial transactions are sent to the intent gossip network to be matched with other partial transactions. Solvers create partial transactions to match the intents of the users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **create a partial transaction:** users create initial partial transactions to announce what they offer and request, including constraints. These partial transactions are sent to the intent gossip network to be matched with other partial transactions. Solvers create partial transactions to match the intents of the users. 
```

- **verify a partial transaction:** each partial transaction contains proofs attesting to its correctness. When a solver receives partial transactions from the intent gossip network, they must verify the proofs.

> - **combine partial transactions:** solvers comibne partial transactions in bundles to build a balanced transaction that satisfies the intents of the involved parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **combine partial transactions:** solvers combine partial transactions in bundles to build a balanced transaction that satisfies the intents of the involved parties.
```

1. Re-compute `rt` of $MT$

## 8. Communication between the shielded and transparent pools
State transitions that do not preserve privacy are called *transparent*. Assuming that the system allows both transparent and shielded state transitions, we say that all of the valid notes created as a result of shielded state transitions form a *shielded pool* and the valid notes created as a result of transparent state transitions form a *transparent pool*. The action of moving data from transparent to shielded pool is called *shielding*, the opposite is called *unshielding*. Shielding (or unshielding) is done by destroying notes in one pool and creating the corresponding notes in the other. *Balancing value* $v^{balance}$ indicates the data move between the pools:
- $v^{balance} = 0$ if the current transaction doesn't move data between pools
- $v^{balance} < 0$ refers to the value moved from the transparent to the shielded pool
- $v^{balance} > 0$ refers to the value moved from the shielded to the transparent pool

The difference between total input value and total output value of a proposed transaction is checked against the balancing value with the help of the binding signature.

> ## Functions provided by Taiga

Reviewer 2: I think it will be clearer if these come _first_ in the document - basically, we should order from "most abstract" to "least abstract", starting with the functions Taiga provides and the types involved, and afterwards giving more detail on how Taiga implements them internally.

#### 1. Create a partial transaction

> **Input:** input and output notes with VP proofs attached

Reviewer 2: We should probably separate out "craft partial tx" and "create proofs for partial tx", right? I imagine that the library user would call Taiga to make the actual proofs?

Author: Ah, I think I mixed up the abstract functions and implementations a bit. Here it describes how it is implemented in practice, I'll rewrite it to be truly abstract.

**Output:**`ptx`

**Specification:** A partial transaction fields are specified [here](#partial-transaction-fields)

> **Used by:** 

Reviewer 2: We don't need to include double-links in the spec I think; it can be annoying since they get out of date easily.

- Solver: solvers create partial transactions to match the intents
- Wallet: the wallet creates the initial `ptx` for a user

#### 2. Verify a partial transaction
**Input:**: `ptx`

**Output:**`ok/error`

**Specification:** The checks are specified [here](#validity-of-a-ptx)

**Used by:**
- Solver: solvers must verify the partial transactions received from other parties

> #### 3. Create a transaction

Reviewer 2: What about combining partial transactions to make a new (still unbalanced, but perhaps "partially matched") partial transaction?

Author: Also influenced by the implementation 🙂 I'll add it
